So far in our authentication implementation
we have logged users in with a correct password.
So basically we completed this first step
of the authentication workflow
where a JSON web token is created
and sent back to the client if the user provides
a correct email and password.
So next up we will actually implement protected routes.
So basically using the created JSON web token
in order to give logged in users access to protected routes.
And this is the second step of authentication.
And so let's now go ahead and implement this functionality.
So let's say that we wanted to protect the
getAllTours route.
So basically only allowing logged in users
to get access to a list of all our tours.
And what what means is that before running
the get all tours handler,
so let's take a look at that.
Okay, so before running this handle here,
we would need to have some check in place
in order to verify if the user
is actually logged in or not, right?
And so the best way of doing that
as you already know at this point probably,
is to use a middleware function, all right?
So in this video, in order to protect routes,
we're gonna to create a middleware function which is
gonna run before each of these handlers, okay.
So a function that is gonna sit right here,
so before this functio here can run.
And this middleware will then either return an error
if the user is not authenticated,
so if he's not logged in,
or it will call the next middleware
which is in this case the getAllTours handler, right?
And that than effective protects this route
from unauthorized access.
So let's go ahead and quickly create
that middleware function
and then put it here
in order to illustrate what I just said.
Okay, so here in our auth controller again
we will create a new middleware function
and it's called protect.
All right,
and just like before I'm gonna use catchAsync
because once more all of these functions
are async function actually.
All right, and then here of course, our middleware function
and for now let's very simply call next here
just so that we have actually any body here
in this middleware function
and then let's go back to our tour routes
and then protect this route, okay?
So first of all I need to actually require this
authentication controller module.
So const
and then require
it's in controllers,
and then authController, okay.
So now let's plug it in, right here
in the getAllTours route.
Okay.
So authController.protect.
And so right now this middleware function is gonna run first
and again, if the user is not authenticated
then there will be an error.
And of course then the next middleware
so the one which actually gets
and sends all of the tours will then not be executed.
Okay.
And so again, this will effectively protect the access
to this resource here from users that are not logged in.
All right, so let's go back here.
Not the user routes,
but the auth controller.
All right, and now about the implementation of
this protect middleware.
What exactly will we have to do?
Well, let's start by lining out a couple of steps here.
All right, and actually first of all we need to mark
this function as Async, otherwise we wouldn't really need
the catchAsync, right?
And you will see why we need this to be an Async function
in a second, all right?
But now let's actually lay out the steps that we need
to take in order to implement this protect middleware.
So just like before,
I'm gonna put these steps here as comments.
First off we need to actually get the token.
And check
if it's there basically,
so checking if it exists.
Then next up we need to validate the token.
And so this is basically that super important step
that we talked about before where the JWT algorithm verifies
if the signature is valid
or if it's not.
And so therefore if the token is valid or not, okay?
And so actually let's call this here verification.
I think that's what we called it in that slide where we
talked about this before, all right.
And if you don't really remember how that worked,
well you can always go back
and re watch that lecture, all right?
Then next up, so if the verification was actually successful
then we also need to check if the user who's trying
to access the route still exists, okay?
So check if user still exists,
and I will talk more about why each of these steps
are necessary once we start implementing them, all right?
So for now this may not make so much sense to you,
but again I will talk about each stop once we get there.
All right?
And finally we need to also check
if
user changed password
after the JWT
was issued, okay?
Well, let's just say token here,
we called it token everywhere else, okay?
And so only if there was no problems
in any of these steps here
only then of course next will be called which will then
get access to the route that we protected.
So in our current example, again, this getAllTours handler.
Right?
Okay, but let's go back
and start implementing our very first step here.
So basically getting the token
and then check if it actually exists.
So a common practice is to send a token using an http header
with the request, okay?
So let's take a look at how we can set headers in Postman
to send him along with the request
and then also how we can get access
to these headers in Express.
And let's actually do that one first.
So here in apt.js I think we have this nice middleware here,
and so in here let's actually log to the console
request.headers,
Okay, so we talked about http headers before,
and so this is how we can get access to them in Express.
Okay, so basically to the request headers,
so the ones that a client can send along with their request.
Okay, and so here in Postman, let's now actually
get to the route that we're actually trying to protect.
And then here set a header.
And let's just do a test one
and set it to jonas, okay?
Now I will just send this
and here in Express, let's take a look at that.
And so indeed here we get an object with all of the headers
that are part of the request.
So all of this here.
And you see that there are a bunch of headers that Postman
actually sends automatically along with the request
for example, it says the the user-agent is Postman
it also sends the host,
and some other ones that we're gonna talk about later
like accept for example.
Now what matters here is actually the header
that we set ourselves.
Okay, so the test header set to jonas that we just sent
in our request.
Now to send a JSON web token as a header, there's actually
a standard for doing that.
So let's go back here, get rid of all of this.
And so that standard for sending a token is that we should
always use a header called authorization.
Okay?
So just like this
and then the value of that header should always start
with Bearer, okay?
Because basically we bear, we have, we possess this token
and then here the value of the token.
So just like this random string that we got before.
So let's just leave it her at this as an example,
and so let's send that now.
And then indeed, we should get it here.
Okay.
Now Express then automatically turns all header names
to lowercase, as you can see here,
but of course, our header value here is still the same.
Okay, and so basically this piece of the header value
is our token.
And so that's how we should now read
that token from the header.
All right?
So
if
there actually is req.headers.authorization,
okay,
and if it starts basically with this bearer string here
so req.headers.authorization
and now this is a string and so we can
use startsWith on that
okay, so this is just normal JavaScript again
okay.
And so these are the conditions under which we actually want
to save a token, okay?
So, again, in case that tghe header exists
and that its value starts with Bearer, okay.
Then in that case we want to say that the token is equal
to req.headers.authorization
and now how do we actually get this second part
of the string?
Well, we're basically gonna split the string
by this space character, okay,
which will then create an array
with this Bearer
and with this token
and so then we're gonna take that part
of the array that we want.
So split using space,
and then from that array we want the second element.
All right?
Now we can't actually define a variable inside
of an if block
because const, and let,
so the new ES6 variable declaratory are
actually block scoped,
and so whatever we define in this block here
will then not be available outside of it.
Okay, and so let's actually do that outside.
And then simply reassign this value to the token.
Okay.
And now, let's log the token to the console
just to see if it works.
Okay, and in fact let's actually get
kind of get a real token here.
So the one that we just logged in with.
And then put that one here, all right.
So send it,
and
ah! Here we go.
So here we have our JSON web token data we just sent along
with the request.
Let's just quickly turn off this console log here.
All right, and then just before we move on
let's then actually check if the token actually exists.
Okay.
So if there is no token
well, then, of course we want to create a new error.
Right, and so just like before
we return from this middleware
and call the next one, okay.
And now in here, we are then going to create an error
and so we will move straight
to our global error handling middleware with this error.
All right, so if there is no token sent with the request,
then that means that we're not logged in.
So let's send to the user you are not
logged in.
Please log in to get access.
All right, and now the status code for this
kind of of situation is 401
which means unauthorized, okay?
Not sure if we've used that one before
and yeah, actually we did it here as well.
Okay, and so this basically means
that the data that was sent in the request is correct,
but they are not enough basically to get the user access
to a resource he is requesting.
All right.
Just give it a save here
and test it out again.
So, if we basically take away this header here,
then we should straight away go into that error,
right?
And indeed, you are not logged in,
please log in to get access.
With 401 unauthorized.
Great! So that part is already working.
All right, and now just to recap,
so right now we are not sending any token along with
the request, right?
And so of that reason, of course, there is no token, okay?
And therefore we create this error,
which will then trigger our error handler middleware to send
that error back to the client, okay?
And then of course we do not get access to all the tours,
because of course this middleware runs
before the getAllTours controller.
And so right now, this really is protected, okay?
So it's really working quite nice already at this point.
But of course, this is far from enough,
because it's not enough to just send a token with a request.
It also need to be a valid token.
So basically a token where no one tried
to change the payload.
Okay, and the payload, remember, in our case is always
the user_id of the user for which the token was issued.
All right, and so next up we need
to implement this verification step.
But this lecture is already running pretty long
and there's still a lot of stuff to do here,
and so let's actually leave that for the next video.